I have a very good question. In the
main Dharma center, there's a nun named
Pham Thi Theu, over 60 years old, who, due to her devotion, wants to leave the monastery. However, her advanced age prevents her from doing so. She told
Thanh that at the end of the year she will go to the temple to ask permission from the Master and the nun to
find another temple that will accept
her. She hopes that the nun will follow her, and that the Master will
help her to attain enlightenment and
avoid going astray. Ms. Thanh is calculating the
merits of the nun's work. Respectfully, dear fellow
practitioners, regarding the matter of leaving the monastery,
this is very important. Leaving the monastery means
we must practice leaving the worldly realm, leaving behind
afflictions. That means we must
practice the Dharma.
Through the practice of the Dharma,
we can achieve liberation.
Sometimes we only think that having the outward
appearance of leaving is good enough, but that's
not the appearance; it's just
shaving the head. We must uphold the
348 precepts to achieve liberation. Leaving the monastery does
n't automatically mean
liberation; we must achieve liberation through practicing the Dharma. For example, there
's a nun in the team.  Shigemi is a
demon consumed by raging fire, its body
wrapped tightly in a robe. Because it
was a general who had committed
illegal acts, it suffered this fate.
That very robe was the blazing fire that consumed the
demon
above. We must remember that we must have clear minds to be able to leave the monastery and
eat the food offered by the Buddhist monks.
When explaining this to fellow practitioners, the master explains it
like this: Why doesn't the master allow those who are old to leave the monastery? But for the
elderly and frail Buddhists of Thuan Thanh, the masters allow them to leave the monastery,
meaning they have the appearance of leaving the monastery. The masters clearly state that they have the appearance of leaving the
monastery, but they don't eat the food offered by the
Buddhist monks. That is, we have the appearance of
leaving the monastery so that we can hope to leave the monastery.
But if the mind is clear, then it
will leave the monastery. Fellow practitioners, if your mind is clear
and you aspire for the next life, you
will achieve the appearance of leaving the monastery, then in the
next life you will leave the monastery. There's nothing else to it. It's not something that the
Buddhist monks are telling you about. Practice is
n't something you
can do without a clear mind.
The shirt was torn, I threw it away, bowed my head,
listening to the books. The
first shirt needed a bath, then I sewed it back together, then
I'll go take a bath.
Well, no, I was sitting there sewing until I was
almost finished when a feeling arose,
changing my normal feeling. I saw
Yen come in to look, and where did this feeling
come from? It
turned out to be from liking.
I like wearing new clothes. The shirt was torn, but
sewn back together,
and the stitching was still newer than
before, so in my experience,
it was still there, I still liked it,
and the feeling was still there. Then Yen
realized, "Ah, this feeling is because I
like wearing this shirt because it was
just sewn back together."
So he let go of that liking,
fully contemplating. As long as there is liking, there is suffering. As long as there is craving, there is
discrimination and attachment, there is
no equality. Not enough to understand all beings. Okay,
then I'll go take a bath. I'll go take a
bath, and the feeling is gone, the
perception is eliminated. Pig goes to take a bath. After Yen finishes bathing, the
house is beautiful with the  The shirt to wear, that shirt is
the shirt I just finished mending. If I
wear it, I'll feel a sense of longing.
Well, when I read about the feeling, it's a
way of showing affection, not just
liking. The desire to wear the shirt,
all the longing, that's what's in the heart.
But the desire is what drives action.
A and Yen, to follow it, the biggest determination
is that it must be taken, to
possess it, to wear it.
I see it as a terrible bondage, a
binding force, and I have to let go of it and wear the
shirt I just took off.
So what is it here?
Before, when I mended the shirt, I liked the new one. Later, I
liked wearing the other shirt because it fit,
it was new, it was clean, and I
cherished this cleanliness.
So it became a longing, not
just a simple liking, and it became a
force that drove me, making
my hands tremble. I felt so good, and I
decided to let go. It's not easy to
get even a grain of rice from the people. A Tiến, the
candidate, is blessed for the Party.  There's no
middle path. So if we
don't comprehend the wind, this isn't clearly understood.
When someone reaches 80 years old, they can still
attain enlightenment as if they are still lucid enough to
practice. They can
see the path, so age isn't a factor. But
if the practice is too long, firstly, if we
don't know how to obey, or if the mind is rebellious,
then there's no time
to wear down one thing and do the other. When a
person learns to obey, it means
abandoning the ego and only knowing how to obey the teacher and
master, doing what they say, just like in our Dharma. The precepts are emptiness. The precepts are emptiness. The precepts are emptiness. Even before
birth, as long as the mother doesn't steal, it
doesn't mix everywhere. As long as we wait for
clarity, that means we become proficient,
abandoning our own, receiving
new knowledge, and diligently practicing that
new knowledge, then we can uphold the Dharma. It's
not about constantly
leaving home and going to the temple whenever we like. There must
be a purpose:
cultivating a peaceful mind,
abandoning impure thoughts, and when young people
emerge, they can easily practice meditation, and the
middle paths become easier.  Contemplation...
Yes, we must be still with ourselves to be
able to contemplate. If we are too greedy,
we won't be able to detect or
receive anything. How can we know what we're feeling and
detect it? If we like candy, we'll just go
buy candy. What else is there to do?
People live off what is offered; if there's something, we eat it, if not, we don't. Whether it's
delicious or not, they'll eat it. They've lost all
possessions like that, they've gone to Tunisia to quit.
So, if we don't
practice the Dharma, going to practice
asceticism might not necessarily be good. Following the path of filial
piety isn't necessarily good.
That's why the teacher doesn't allow us to leave at
such an old age; it's already quite good. That's
compassion for sentient beings. Because now
isn't the time of the Buddha, where there are
saints who can contemplate and encourage us.
For example, in
the time of the Buddha, there was this:
you are quiet, you just sleep.
The technique comes right to you. The Buddha truly knows
your karma from your previous life. The
Buddha said above, "The fault of diligence is
like a monk who is too
lazy."  The Buddha said that he went to the back
of the mountain and sat there to
contemplate. Then, in the evening, the Buddha would be free to come and reduce
the illusion of reality and illusion, and after contemplating, he diligently
practiced the Dharma. The
important thing is that we must
practice the Dharma skillfully and obey the Dharma.
I'll give an example of the Dharma's consequences.
We have the Dharma, we obey it, and we think accordingly. I
practice the Dharma, don't hide or
sneak around doing illegal things anymore. We
must wait for the Righteous, then we will be good. There are
many things that are happening, and if you
go anywhere, that's your right
and you don't need to ask permission. Who
agrees to let you go to another temple and withdraw?
Because I don't know how to practice.
I agree, but is it sowing karma
there? If not, it depends on fate.
Who would say, "Okay, I'll leave, I'll go to the
village temple."
Who dares to say they agree or
not? Because at that temple... Actually,
the Master doesn't know whether they practice the
Dharma or not, how to teach the disciples. Yen
also doesn't know how to agree or not,
and doesn't have the right to agree or not.
The right to obstruct the path of practice is unclear; this is
not yet dependent on circumstances. The right to practice is the right
of a Buddhist, and what right does it have of me?
Whoever comes to me, I
guide them according to what I understand to
practice. As for us Buddhists, if we are
old, we should become Thuan Thanh Buddhists,
practicing diligently. Then the monks will
shave our heads, a sign of coming forth
monthly, meaning a sign of coming forth to practice.
Or, when we are nearing death, the
monks will come forth for us right then. At that moment,
we can listen to the Dharma, ask questions, and experience joy and
benefit greatly if we
truly serve the Three Jewels and practice well. Do you understand
this point, fellow practitioners? And
then the monks come forth, like this senior monk.
These monks come forth for the elderly, they
come forth for all the lay practitioners at the temple. I
heard that when it's near the time of
the Enlightenment, or a
period before, the monks will come forth for the
Buddhists. Remember to
examine your mind so that you can perform the Bodhisattva vows monthly,
not just a normal coming forth. After coming
forth, you must examine your mind daily.
So, after that, when it comes to
repentance, if you can't go, you have to send your belongings to a
fund for the Dharma. It's not like we
just think that we're here at the temple. We
have to remember that we leave to seek and
practice the Dharma of liberation, not to go
to the temple to live there so the
temple can take care of us in our old age, so we don't have to go back to
our hometown, so
we don't have to worry about
old age. That's not it. If you
want to contribute, just come back to the temple and do volunteer work long-term. When you're
nearing the end of your life, you can
leave completely without worrying about anything.
Why is it that you can practice the Dharma at
Ba Vang Temple? Once you leave, you have to
practice meditation, contemplate your body and mind, and practice
in the forest. But if you
have to choose your food and sleep in a place
all day, and your
clothes are wrinkled and you have to choose your colors, then that's how it is.
I'll answer like
that: it depends on fate, sister. Yes,
yes.